Design Document for Zero-Copy via Loaned Messages (#256)
ros2/design: articles/zero_copy.md

There are two primary kinds of use cases when publishing data which are relevant in this article:

1. The user creates and owns an instance of a message which they wish to publish and then reuse after publishing.
2. The user borrows a message instance from the middleware, copies data into the message, and returns the ownership of the message during publish.

Currently, only the first case is possible with the `rclcpp` API.
After calling publish, the user still owns the message and may reuse it immedeately.

In order to support the second use case, we need a way for the user to get at least a single message from the middleware, which they may then populate, then return when publishing.

In the second case, the memory that is used for the loaned message should be optionally provided by the middleware.
For example, the middleware may use this opportunity to use a preallocated pool of message instances, or it may return instances of messages allocated in shared memory.
However, if the middleware does not have special memory handling or preallocations, it may refuse to loan memory to the client library, and in that case, a user provided allocator should be used.

> This allows the user to have control over the allocation of the message when the middleware might otherwise use the standard allocator (new/malloc).

Reviewer: > it may refuse to loan memory to the client library, and in that case, a user provided allocator should be used.

this makes a lot of sense.

> This allows the user to have control over the allocation of the message when the middleware might otherwise use the standard allocator (new/malloc)

This seems to contradict that prior statement, though. Maybe I'm not reading this quite right?

I think this should read something more along the lines of "If the middleware does not have specific protocols for handling preallocations of messages, it should use the `rcutils` allocator."

I could be way off base in my interpretation, though.

Reviewer 2: I agree it could be more clear.

> "If the middleware does not have specific protocols for handling preallocations of messages, it should use the rcutils allocator."

I think this is almost right, but I don't think the user is limited to the `rcutils` allocator. They could provide their own.

Reviewer: > I don't think the user is limited to the rcutils allocator. They could provide their own.

Yeah, I like that better. :+1:

Author: So does this need additional clarification?  I believe that what is there summarizes the correct behavior?

Reviewer 2: Re-reading what's in the document, it makes sense to me. I don't have a solid suggestion for changing it.

The user should be able to influence what the `Executor` does, and in the case that memory needs to be allocated, the user should be able to provide an allocator or memory management strategy which would influence the `Executor`'s behavior.

## Requirements

Based on the the use cases above, the general requirements are as follows:

* Users must be able to avoid all memory operations and copies in at least one configuration.

### Publisher Requirements

* The user must be able to publish from messages allocated in their stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message, use it, and return it during publication.
* When taking a loan, the middleware should not do anything "special", that is that the user must be able to influence the allocation.

### Subscription Requirements

The following requirements should hold whether the user is polling or using a wait set.

* The user must be able to have the middleware fill data into messages allocated in the user's stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message from the middleware when calling take.

> * The user must be able to get a sequence of loaned messages from the middleware when calling take.

Author: Note from @Karsten1987 :

> There should be a parameter for specifying how many items such a sequence can hold. That would help to use fixed size containers in its implementation. This could be defaulted to the subscription history depth though.

> * The loaned message or sequence must be returned by the user.

Author: Note from @Karsten1987:

> We should specify how we can make sure that the user doesn't hold too many of these loaned messages when not taking them via the executor/callback but rather via polling the waitset.

> AUTOSAR specifies this as not possible to gain access to the sequence without specifying an according callback where the sequence eventually gets passed in via std::unique_ptr.

Reviewer 3: @mjcarroll: How does the AUTOSAR approach help? I still can just keep the `unique_ptr` in my container forever.

Author: I don't think that AUTOSAR helps, this was from our initial brainstorming notes.  The important point was that if users hold on to loaned messages, at some point the underlying mechanism is going to stop working.

> * When taking a loan, the middleware should not do anything "special", that is that the user must be able to influence the allocation.

Reviewer 4: Should that be when _not_ taking a loan? To my understanding the middleware should be completely in charge of allocations when taking a loan. However, if the middleware isn’t capable of zero copy, the user should have means to pass in custom allocators and thus control the allocation.

Author: I was a bit unclear on this as I was going through the previous notes.

Is the idea that users should _always_ take a loan, regardless of if the middleware supports it?  That would put the burden on the middleware for managing that memory.  Or should it be the case that there is no allocation when loans aren't supported?

Reviewer 2: I think @Karsten1987 is correct, based on what I read in the use-case section above,

> the user is delegating the memory management of the client library via the Executor. The Executor may or may not borrow data from the middleware, but the user callback does not care, so this can be considered an implementation detail. The user should be able to influence what the Executor does, and **in the case that memory needs to be allocated**, the user should be able to provide an allocator or memory management strategy which would influence the Executor's behavior.

I've made bold the key phrase "in the case that memory needs to be allocated". My interpretation is the the client library will try to take a loan if possible, and if it is not possible then use any allocator/memory management strategy provided by the user.

* The Connext API (more generally the DDS API) requires that the user to use a sequence of messages when taking or reading.
  * This means the ROS API needs to do the same, otherwise the middleware would be giving a "loan" to a message in a sequence, but it would also need to keep the sequence immutable.
* Needs to keep sample and sample info together, therefore `rclcpp` loaned message sequence needs to own both somehow.

Connext Micro Specific (ZeroCopy):

* The user needs to be able to check if data has been invalidated after reading it.

### Nice to Haves

* When using loaned messages, the overhead should be minimized, so that it can be used as the general approach as often as possible.
  * Versus reusing a user owned message on the stack or heap.
  * We will still recommend reusing a message repeatedly from the stack or heap of the user.
* Memory operations and copies should be avoided anywhere possible.

## Design Proposal

### RMW API

Introduce APIs for creating/destroying loaned messages, as well as structure for management:

```
void *
rmw_allocate_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher,
  const rosidl_message_type_support_t * type_support,

>   size_t message_size

Reviewer 5: While some messages are PODs many messages containing sequences are not. In the pending PR in `rclcpp` e.g. the value `sizeof(MessageT)` is passed for this argument. How does that handle the memory allocation of the sequence fields since it doesn't seem to be the case that the RMW interface is aware of how many items should be allocated for the message?

Reviewer 4: When creating a publisher, it has to be distinguished whether the publisher can loan messages of the given message type or not. If not, the call to `rmw_allocate_loaned_message` shall fail.

Reviewer 5: Your response doesn't rely answer my question. I understand that if loaning isn't supported the calling code can detect that and use a different approach if desired. So the question remains: is this design draft and the implementation limited to POD message? If yes, this needs to be mentioned in this article imo. Also from my point of few that would be a severe limitation of the proposal and would need a very good rational why non-POD aren't / can't be supported (since they are the majority of message types).

Reviewer 4: non-POD must be supported. The only thing not being guaranteed with non-POD is that a zero-copy mechanism can be supported. That is, for heap allocated data structures, copies and eventual serializations have to be done. 
But I see your point that this has to be noted more explicitly in this design doc.

Reviewer 5: My concern is that I am not convinced that the currently proposed API is capable of supporting non-POD messages. And if that is the case I would like to see an API which is able to support that or a rational why that is not possible / feasible.

Reviewer 5: > My concern is that I am not convinced that the currently proposed API is capable of supporting non-POD messages. And if that is the case I would like to see an API which is able to support that or a rational why that is not possible / feasible.

@Karsten1987 Can you please comment on my last reply when you have a chance.

Reviewer 5: The API in question has been removed in the mean time. The new signature of `rmw_borrow_loaned_message` is not limited like this so this looks fine to me.

);

rmw_ret_t
rmw_deallocate_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher,
  void * loaned_message
);
```

Extend publisher API for loaned messages:

```
rmw_ret_t
rmw_publish(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher

>   const void * ros_message

Reviewer: Missing some ','s on these lines.

  rmw_publisher_allocation_t * allocation,
  bool is_loaned
);
```

Extend subscription API for taking loaned message:

```
// TODO
```

### RCL API

Introduce APIs for creating/destroying loaned messages, as well as structure for management:

```
void *

> rcl_allocate_loaned_message(

Reviewer: Has the message already been loaned? If it is planned to be loaned, maybe this should be called `rcl_allocate_loaner_message`?

);

rcl_ret_t
rcl_deallocate_loaned_message(
  const rcl_publisher_t * publisher,
  rcl_loaned_message_t * loaned_message
);
```

Extend publisher API for loaned messages:

```
rcl_ret_t
rcl_publish(
  const rcl_publisher_t * publisher,
  const void * ros_message,
  rmw_publisher_allocation_t * allocation,
  bool is_loaned
);

bool
rcl_publisher_can_loan_messages(const rcl_publisher_t * publisher);
```

Extend subscription API for taking loaned message:

```
// TODO
```

### RCLCPP LoanedMessage

In order to support loaned messages in `rclcpp`, we tntroduce the concept of a `LoanedMessage`.
A `LoanedMessage` provides a wrapper around the underlying loan mechanisms, and manages the loan's lifecycle.

```
template <class MsgT, typename Alloc = std::allocator<void>>
class LoanedMessage
{
public:
  // Get the underlying message
  MsgT& get()

  // Check if underlying message is valid and consistent
  bool is_consistent();

  // Loan message from the middleware, if loaning is not available,
  // allocate memory using Alloc
  LoanedMessage(
    const rclcpp::Publisher<MsgT, Alloc> * pub);

private:
  const rclcpp::Publisher<MsgT, Alloc> * pub_;

  // Holds details of the message loan

>   rcl_loaned_message_t * loaned_msg_;

Reviewer 4: I think we come around having this a `void *` pointing to memory appropriately allocated by `rmw_allocate_loaned_message()`

  // Will be initialized with memory from loaned_msg_, otherwise allocated.
  std::unique_ptr<MsgT> msg_;
};
```

### RCLCPP Publisher

Extend RCLCPP API:

```
// Return a loaned message from the middleware
rclcpp::LoanedMessage<MsgT, Alloc>
rclcpp::Publisher::loan_message()

// Publish a loaned message, returning the loan
void
rclcpp::Publisher::publish(std::unique_ptr<rclcpp::LoanedMessage<MsgT, Alloc>> loaned_msg);

// Test if the middleware supports loaning messages
bool
rclcpp::Publisher::can_loan_messages()
```

> ### RCLCPP Subscription

Reviewer 6: I guess, that no modification in RCLCPP subscription would be needed.
Maybe we would need to add a new subscription signature more convenient for loaned messages, but not more than that. Probably, similar changes would be needed in rcl/rmw.

> 

Reviewer 6: We should also add to the document an RCLPY API

Author: Python API is out of the scope for the moment.

---
layout: default
title: Zero Copy via Loaned Messages
permalink: articles/zero_copy.html
abstract:
author: '[Karsten Knese](https://github.com/karsten1987) [William Woodall](https://github.com/wjwwood) [Michael Carroll](https://github.com/mjcarroll)'
published: false
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

## Overview

There is a need to eliminate unnecessary copies throughout the ROS2 stack to maximize performance and determinism.
In order to eliminate copies, the user must have more advanced control over memory management in the client library and middleware.
One method of eliminating copies is via message loaning, that is the middleware can loan messages that are populated by the end user.
This document outlines desired changes in the middleware and client libraries required to support message loaning.

## Motivation

The motivation for message loaning is to increase performance and determinism in ROS2.

> As additional motivation, there are specific middle implementations that allow for zero-copy via shared memory mechanisms.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
As additional motivation, there are specific middleware implementations that allow for zero-copy via shared memory mechanisms.
```

These enhancements would allow ROS2 to take advantage of the shared memory mechanisms exposed by these implementations.

> An example of zero-copy transfer is [RTI Connext DDS Micro](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-micro/3.0.0/doc/html/usersmanual/zerocopy.html)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
An example of zero-copy transfer is [RTI Connext DDS Micro](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-micro/3.0.0/doc/html/usersmanual/zerocopy.html).
```

### Publisher Use Cases

There are two primary kinds of use cases when publishing data which are relevant in this article:

> 1. The user creates and owns an instance of a message which they which to publish and then reuse after publishing.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
1. The user creates and owns an instance of a message which they wish to publish and then reuse after publishing.
```

2. The user borrows a message instance from the middleware, copies data into the message, and returns the ownership of the message during publish.

Currently, only the first case is possible with the `rclcpp` API.
After calling publish, the user still owns the message and may reuse it immedeately.

In order to support the second use case, we need a way for the user to get at least a single message from the middleware, which they may then populate, then return when publishing.

In the second case, the memory that is used for the loaned message should be optionally provided by the middleware.
For example, the middleware may use this opportunity to use a preallocated pool of message instances, or it may return instances of messages allocated in shared memory.
However, if the middleware does not have special memory handling or preallocations, it may refuse to loan memory to the client library, and in that case, a user provided allocator should be used.

> This allows the user to have control over the allocation of the message when the middleware would otherwise use the standard allocator (new/malloc)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This allows the user to have control over the allocation of the message when the middleware might otherwise use the standard allocator (new/malloc).
```

### Publisher Requirements

* The user must be able to publish from messages allocated in their stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message, use it, and return it during publication.
* When taking a loan, the middleware should not do anything "special", that is that the user must be able to influence the allocation.

### Subscription Requirements

The following requirements should hold whether the user is polling or using a wait set.

* The user must be able to have the middleware fill data into messages allocated in the user's stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message from the middleware when calling take.
* The user must be able to get a sequence of loaned messages from the middleware when calling take.
* The loaned message or sequence must be returned by the user.
* When taking a loan, the middleware should not do anything "special", that is that the user must be able to influence the allocation.

### Special Requirements

These requirements are driven by idiosyncrasies of various middleware implementations and some of their special operating modes, e.g. zero copy:

#### RTI Connext DDS

> * The Connext API (more generally the DDS API) requires that you use a sequence of messages when taking or reading.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* The Connext API (more generally the DDS API) requires that the user to use a sequence of messages when taking or reading.
```

Connext Micro Specific (ZeroCopy):

* The user needs to be able to check if data has been invalidated after reading it.

### Nice to Haves

* When using loaned messages, the overhead should be minimized, so that it can be used as the general approach as often as possible.
  * Versus reusing a user owned message on the stack or heap.
  * We will still recommend reusing a message repeatedly from the stack or heap of the user.
* Memory operations and copies should be avoided anywhere possible.

## Design Proposal

### RMW API

Introduce APIs for creating/destroying loaned messages, as well as structure for management:

```
struct rmw_loaned_message_t
{
  const char * implementation_identifier;
  rmw_publisher_t * publisher;
  void * data;
}

rmw_ret_t rmw_allocate_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher,
  const rosidl_message_type_support_t * type_support,
  size_t message_size,
  rmw_loaned_message_t * loaned_message
);

rmw_ret_t rmw_deallocate_loaned_message(
  rmw_loaned_message_t * loaned_message
);
```

Extend publisher API for loaned messages:

```
// This would not need knowledge of the rmw_publisher_t, as the message allocation
// is tied to the publisher.

> rmw_ret_t rmw_publish(

Reviewer 4: I think we've discussed changing the existing `rmw_publish` function solely by passing a boolean argument `is_loaned` to it, as the rest of the function arguments can stay the same, i.e. the `void *` to a ros message instance.

Author: Will update accordingly, and change the allocate/deallocate to work on `void *`

---
layout: default
title: Zero Copy via Loaned Messages
permalink: articles/zero_copy.html
abstract:
author: '[Karsten Knese](https://github.com/karsten1987) [William Woodall](https://github.com/wjwwood) [Michael Carroll](https://github.com/mjcarroll)'
published: false
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

## Overview

> There is a need to eliminate unnecessary copies throughout the ROS2 stack to maximize performance and determinism.

Reviewer 2: I think we prefer "ROS 2" over "ROS2" (as it's written all over the [documentation](https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/)). The same change can be made throughout this document.
```suggestion
There is a need to eliminate unnecessary copies throughout the ROS 2 stack to maximize performance and determinism.
```

This allows the user to have control over the allocation of the message when the middleware might otherwise use the standard allocator (new/malloc).

#### Additional Publisher Use Case

One additional publishing use case is allowing the user to loan the message to the middleware during asynchronous publishing.
This use case comes up when all or part of the data being published is located in memory that the middleware cannot allocate from, e.g. a hardware buffer via memory mapped I/O or something similar, and the user wants to still have zero copy and asynchronous publishing.
In this case, the user needs to call publish, then keep the message instance immutable until the middleware lets the user know that it is done with the loaned data.

This is a narrow use case and will require additional interfaces to support, therefore it will be out of scope for this document, but it is mentioned for completion.

### Subscription Use Cases

There are two ways the users may take message instances from a subscription when data is available:

> 1. Taking direction from the `Subscription` after polling it for data availability or waiting via a wait set.

Reviewer 2: "directly"?
```suggestion
1. Taking directly from the `Subscription` after polling it for data availability or waiting via a wait set.
```

  * Versus reusing a user owned message on the stack or heap.
  * We will still recommend reusing a message repeatedly from the stack or heap of the user.
* Memory operations and copies should be avoided anywhere possible.

## Design Proposal

### RMW API

Introduce APIs for creating/destroying loaned messages, as well as structure for management:

```
void *
rmw_borrow_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher,
  const rosidl_message_type_support_t * type_support,
  void ** ros_message
);

rmw_ret_t
rmw_return_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher,
  void * loaned_message
);
```

Extend publisher API for loaned messages:

```
rmw_ret_t
rmw_publish_loaned_message(
  const rmw_publisher_t * publisher
  const void * ros_message
  rmw_publisher_allocation_t * allocation
);
```

Extend subscription API for taking loaned message.
Because a subscription does not necessarily allocate new memory for the loaned message during a take, the message only needs to be released rather than returned.

```
rmw_ret_t
rmw_take_loaned_message(
  const rmw_subscription_t * subscription
  void ** loaned_message,

>   book * taken,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  bool * taken,
```

  void * loaned_message
);
```

### RCL API

Introduce APIs for creating/destroying loaned messages, as well as structure for management:

```
void *
rcl_borrow_loaned_message(
  const rcl_publisher_t * publisher,
  const rosidl_message_type_support_t * type_support,
  void ** ros_message
);

rcl_ret_t
rcl_return_loaned_message(
  const rcl_publisher_t * publisher,
  rcl_loaned_message_t * loaned_message
);
```

Extend publisher API for loaned messages:

```
rcl_ret_t
rcl_publish_loaned_message(
  const rcl_publisher_t * publisher,
  const void * ros_message,
  rmw_publisher_allocation_t * allocation
);

bool
rcl_publisher_can_loan_messages(const rcl_publisher_t * publisher);
```

Extend subscription API for taking loaned message:

```
rcl_ret_t
rcl_take_loaned_message(
  const rcl_subscription_t * subscription,
  void ** loaned_message,
  rmw_message_info_t * message_info,
  rmw_subscription_allocation_t * allocation
);

rcl_ret_t
rcl_release_loaned_message(
  const rcl_subscription_t * subscription,
  void * loaned_message
);

bool
rcl_subscription_can_loan_messages(const rcl_subscription_t * subscription);
```

### RCLCPP LoanedMessage

> In order to support loaned messages in `rclcpp`, we tntroduce the concept of a `LoanedMessage`.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In order to support loaned messages in `rclcpp`, we introduce the concept of a `LoanedMessage`.
```

---
layout: default
title: Zero Copy via Loaned Messages
permalink: articles/zero_copy.html
abstract:
author: '[Karsten Knese](https://github.com/karsten1987) [William Woodall](https://github.com/wjwwood) [Michael Carroll](https://github.com/mjcarroll)'
published: false
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

## Overview

There is a need to eliminate unnecessary copies throughout the ROS 2 stack to maximize performance and determinism.
In order to eliminate copies, the user must have more advanced control over memory management in the client library and middleware.
One method of eliminating copies is via message loaning, that is the middleware can loan messages that are populated by the end user.
This document outlines desired changes in the middleware and client libraries required to support message loaning.

## Motivation

> The motivation for message loaning is to increase performance and determinism in ROS2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The motivation for message loaning is to increase performance and determinism in ROS 2.
```

As additional motivation, there are specific middleware implementations that allow for zero-copy via shared memory mechanisms.

> These enhancements would allow ROS2 to take advantage of the shared memory mechanisms exposed by these implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These enhancements would allow ROS 2 to take advantage of the shared memory mechanisms exposed by these implementations.
```

## Requirements

Based on the use cases above, the general requirements are as follows:

* Users must be able to avoid all memory operations and copies in at least one configuration.

### Publisher Requirements

* The user must be able to publish from messages allocated in their stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message, use it, and return it during publication.
* When taking a loan, the middleware should not do anything "special", that is that the user must be able to influence the allocation.

### Subscription Requirements

The following requirements should hold whether the user is polling or using a wait set.

* The user must be able to have the middleware fill data into messages allocated in the user's stack or heap.
* The user must be able to get a loaned message from the middleware when calling take.
* The user must be able to get a sequence of loaned messages from the middleware when calling take.
* The loaned message or sequence must be returned by the user.

>   * In general, users should return loans as soon as feasibly possible, as the underlying mechanism has finite resources to loan messages from. Holding loans too long may cause messages to dropped or publications to stall.

Reviewer 2: One sentence per line.

permalink: articles/zero_copy.html
abstract:
author: '[Karsten Knese](https://github.com/karsten1987) [William Woodall](https://github.com/wjwwood) [Michael Carroll](https://github.com/mjcarroll)'
published: false
---

{:toc}

# {{ page.title }}

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
{{ page.abstract }}
</div>

## Overview

There is a need to eliminate unnecessary copies throughout the ROS 2 stack to maximize performance and determinism.
In order to eliminate copies, the user must have more advanced control over memory management in the client library and middleware.
One method of eliminating copies is via message loaning, that is the middleware can loan messages that are populated by the end user.
This document outlines desired changes in the middleware and client libraries required to support message loaning.

## Motivation

The motivation for message loaning is to increase performance and determinism in ROS 2.

As additional motivation, there are specific middleware implementations that allow for zero-copy via shared memory mechanisms.
These enhancements would allow ROS 2 to take advantage of the shared memory mechanisms exposed by these implementations.

> An example of zero-copy transfer is [RTI Connext DDS Micro](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-micro/3.0.0/doc/html/usersmanual/zerocopy.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Examples of zero-copy transfer are [RTI Connext DDS Micro](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-micro/3.0.0/doc/html/usersmanual/zerocopy.html) and [Eclipse iceoryx](https://github.com/eclipse/iceoryx).
```
